.TH DEB 1 "2026-04-07" "deb repo" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
deb \- Debian / Raspberry Pi setup scripts and patches
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ~/deb/menu
.RI [ choice ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B deb
repo contains shell scripts for setting up and hardening Debian-based systems,
primarily Raspberry Pi OS.
It covers SSH configuration, sudo setup, firewall rules, Docker installation,
and various utilities.
.PP
Start with the interactive menu:
.PP
.RS
~/deb/menu
.RE
.PP
An optional argument runs that choice directly and exits without showing the menu:
.PP
.RS
~/deb/menu b
.RE
.SH INSTALL
.B Minimal install
(deb repo only):
.PP
.RS
bash <(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/refap3/deb/master/install.sh)
.RE
.PP
Clones a shallow copy into
.IR ~/deb .
Then run
.BR ~/deb/menu .
.PP
.B Full bootstrap
(git + deb + alias dotfiles + Docker apt source repository + Docker CE + Portainer):
.PP
.RS
bash <(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/refap3/deb/master/install.sh) --full
.RE
.PP
After
.BR --full ,
log out and back in for the docker group to take effect.
.PP
.B Update (requires alias repo):
.PP
.RS
dbu
.RE
.PP
Or manually:
.PP
.RS
git -C ~/deb fetch --depth=1 origin master && git -C ~/deb reset --hard origin/master
.RE
.SH MENU
Running
.B ~/deb/menu
presents an interactive numbered menu with these options:
.TP
.B 1. Install SSH keys
Runs
.I patch_sshkeys
\(em copies
.I authorized_keys
to
.I ~/.ssh/
with correct permissions.
.TP
.B 2. Enable login with KEY only
Runs
.I patch_ssh_only
\(em disables password authentication in sshd, key-only login.
.TP
.B 3. Enable login with password
Runs
.I patch_ssh_password
\(em re-enables password authentication in sshd.
.TP
.B 4. Remove SSH password warning
Runs
.I patch_remove_password_warning
\(em removes
.I /etc/profile.d/sshpwd.sh
warning script.
.TP
.B 5. Enable sudo (Debian)
Runs
.I patch_sudo
\(em installs sudo and adds the
.I debian8
user to the sudo group.
.TP
.B 6. Enable sudo (Ubuntu)
Runs
.I ub_patch_sudo
\(em appends a NOPASSWD rule to
.IR /etc/sudoers .
.TP
.B 7. Github credential helper
Configures git to cache credentials with
.IR "git config --global credential.helper store" .
On next push, credentials are prompted and stored.
.TP
.B 8. Install Docker stack
Runs
.IR install_docker ,
then starts
.B ntopng + InfluxDB + Grafana
via docker-compose.
.TP
.B 9. Manage Daily Reboot
Sub-menu with three options:
.B 1\ set\ up
\(em creates
.I ~/reboot_daily.sh
and adds
.I 0 2 * * * /sbin/reboot
to root's crontab (via
.IR "sudo crontab" )
so reboot runs as root without a TTY or password prompt;
.B 2\ remove
\(em deletes the script and removes the root crontab entry;
.B 3\ check\ status
\(em shows root and user crontab reboot entries, the script contents,
warns if an old broken user-crontab entry is still present,
and prints the last 5 reboots from
.IR wtmp
via
.BR last (1).
.TP
.B a. Install alias
Clones the alias shell dotfiles repo into
.I ~/alias
and runs
.IR deploy.sh .
.TP
.B b. Disk Speed Test
Runs
.I disk_speed_test
\(em 128 MB read/write benchmark with a 1\(en10 rating.
.TP
.B c. CPU Speed Test
Runs
.I cpu_speed_test
\(em single-core and multi-core benchmark (3M pure-Python float iterations; falls back to bc if python3 absent) with a 1\(en10 rating calibrated to Raspberry Pi hardware.
.TP
.B d. Uninstall Docker
Runs
.I uninstall_docker
\(em stops and removes all containers, volumes, images, Docker packages, the docker group, and the Docker apt source list and GPG key. Use before re-running
.IR install_docker .
.TP
.B e. Uninstall full bootstrap
Runs
.I uninstall_full
\(em reverses a complete
.B --full
bootstrap: calls
.I uninstall_docker
then removes the alias dotfiles from
.IR ~/alias .
Use to get back to a clean state before re-testing
.BR "install.sh --full" .
.SH SCRIPTS
.SS SSH Patches
.TP
.I patch_sshkeys
Installs
.I authorized_keys
to
.I ~/.ssh/
with chmod 600.
.TP
.I patch_ssh_only
Sets
.I PasswordAuthentication no
in sshd_config and restarts sshd.
Rollback:
.IR patch_ssh_password .
.TP
.I patch_ssh_password
Re-enables
.I PasswordAuthentication yes
in sshd_config.
.TP
.I patch_remove_password_warning
Removes the shell-login SSH password warning.
.SS Sudo Patches
.TP
.I patch_sudo
Installs sudo and adds
.I debian8
to the sudo group.
.TP
.I ub_patch_sudo
Ubuntu variant: appends NOPASSWD rule to
.IR /etc/sudoers .
.SS Firewall
.TP
.I patch_iptables
Installs iptables rules and hooks them into
.I /etc/network/if-pre-up.d/
so they are applied at every boot.
.TP
.I iptables.up.rules
Rule definitions: drops TCP/UDP port 111 (rpcbind), allows all other traffic.
.PP
Verify with:
.RS
sudo nmap <host-ip>
.RE
Expected result: port 22 open, port 111 filtered.
.SS Installation Scripts
.TP
.I install_docker
Adds the official Docker apt source repository (GPG key +
.IR /etc/apt/sources.list.d/docker.list ),
then installs Docker CE, docker-compose plugin, and adds the current user to the
.I docker
group.
Also runs Portainer.
After install, log out and back in before running
.I docker-compose up -d
from
.IR ~/deb .
.TP
.I uninstall_docker
Fully removes Docker: stops and deletes all containers, volumes, and images;
purges all Docker packages; removes
.IR /var/lib/docker ;
deletes the docker group; removes the Docker apt source list
.RI ( /etc/apt/sources.list.d/docker.list )
and GPG key
.RI ( /etc/apt/keyrings/docker.asc ).
Run this before re-installing Docker.
.TP
.I uninstall_full
Reverses a complete
.B --full
bootstrap: calls
.I uninstall_docker
then removes
.I ~/alias
and the deployed dotfiles.
Use this to reset to a clean state before re-testing
.BR "install.sh --full" .
.TP
.I install_dotnet
Installs .NET Core runtime to
.IR /opt/dotnet .
.TP
.I nodered-install-debian
Installs Node-RED via the official installer script and enables the systemd service.
.SS Utilities
.TP
.I disk_speed_test
128 MB read/write benchmark on the current directory.
Rates the result 1\(en10.
Also available as
.B dst
alias (requires alias repo).
.TP
.I cpu_speed_test
Single-core and multi-core CPU benchmark.
Uses
.BR python3 (1)
(preferred; always available on Raspberry Pi OS) to run 3 million pure-Python
floating-point iterations \(em a workload that differentiates Pi hardware:
~175 ms on a modern Mac, ~350 ms on a Pi 4, ~1100 ms on a Pi 3, ~3000 ms on a Pi Zero class device.
Falls back to
.BR bc (1)
(pi to 5000 digits) if python3 is absent.
Rating thresholds are calibrated separately for each engine.
Shows parallel speedup across all logical CPUs and rates single-core performance 1\(en10.
.TP
.I map_smb_share
Mounts a CIFS/SMB share and adds it to
.IR /etc/fstab .
Edit the variables at the top of the file before running.
.TP
.I snippets_aigen_hass_routing
Home Assistant gateway switching menu (for JuiceSSH / Termius).
.SH DOCKER MONITORING STACK
The included
.I docker-compose.yaml
runs three services:
.TP
.B ntopng
Network traffic monitor. Runs in host network mode. Requires
.IR ntopng.license .
.TP
.B InfluxDB 2.7
Time-series database on port
.BR 8086 .
First run: open
.I http://<host>:8086
to complete initial setup.
.TP
.B Grafana 11
Dashboard on port
.B 4000
\(em
.IR http://<host>:4000 .
.PP
Start:
.RS
sudo ~/deb/install_docker
.br
# log out and back in
.br
cd ~/deb && docker-compose up -d
.RE
.SH PREREQUISITES
.IP \(bu 4
Debian 10+ or Raspberry Pi OS (64-bit recommended for Docker stack)
.IP \(bu 4
.IR git ,
.IR sudo ,
.IR curl
installed
.IP \(bu 4
Internet access for install scripts
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ssh (1),
.BR sshd_config (5),
.BR iptables (8),
.BR docker (1),
.BR crontab (1)
.SH VIEW THIS PAGE
.RS
man deb
.RE
.SH AUTHOR
rainers
